---
layout: post
mathjax: true
title: Physics
category: Physics
tags: [Physics]
---


### What is physics?
According to the Oxford Languages Dictionary https://languages.oup.com/google-dictionary-en/, physics is “the branch of science concerned with the nature and properties of matter and energy. The subject matter of physics, distinguished from that of chemistry and biology, includes mechanics, heat, light and other radiation, sound, electricity, magnetism, and the structure of atoms.” 





### What do physicists do?

-They teach in secondary schools, universities, and other venues such as teachers' colleges.

-They do research, both "pure" and applied. (I'm not cazy about the adjective "pure"; it makes it sound like applied physics is impure.  But we're stuck with it.)

According to AI, 
"Pure and applied physics" refers to two complementary approaches to the study of physics. Pure physics focuses on understanding the fundamental laws of nature, while applied physics focuses on using those laws to develop practical technologies and solve real-world problems."  AI is correct.  But there is a caveat: the boundaries are not always clear.  "Pure" physics often turns out to produce practial applications. For example, studying the basic structure of atoms led to the laser.

My career consisted of both teaching and research, as well as naming, studying, and reducing science anxiety. See the section on science anxiety.

# TEACHING

Physics avoidance” is common for example, in US high schools, sometimes aided and abetted by making it non-required. Of US university students, only one third of one percent are studying physics as their major subject. Even among the STEM (Science Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics) students, only two percent are majoring in physics. In comic--and sometimes not-so-comic--stereotypes, mad physicists play a prominent role. Examples:

  - The Invisible Ray: “A scientist becomes murderous after discovering, and being exposed to the radiation of, a powerful new element called Radium X.”

  - Man Made Monster: “A mad scientist turns a man into an electrically-controlled monster to do his bidding.”
  
  - The Fly: “A scientist has a horrific accident when he tries to use his newly invented teleportation device.”
  
  - Monster of Terror: “A young man visits his fiancée's estate to discover that her wheelchair-bound scientist father has discovered a meteorite that emits mutating radiation rays that have turned the plants in his greenhouse to giants.” 

  - Last, but surely not least, Stanley Kubrick’s Dr. Strangelove. (“Mein Führer, I can valk!”) Even the good guys, such as Spiderman and the Hulk gained their powers by exposure to radioactivity.

To be fair, Dr. Frankenstein was a biologist. And although it is not related to physics, who can resist The Devil Bat? “A mad scientist develops an aftershave lotion that causes his gigantic bats to kill anyone who wears it.”

Teaching methods:

The traditional method has been the lecture, known variously as "chalk and talk" and 'the sage on the stage". It need not be abandoned, but over the last few decades, various teaching strategies have been shown to aid science learning. These include:

•	The implementation of teacher–student and student–student interaction in lieu of straight lecturing.

•	The design of laboratories to elicit creativity in approaches to problem definition and solution, in lieu of “cookbook” instructions.

•	The demonstration of multiple approaches to acquiring scientific knowledge,  “Show that the period of a pendulum doesn't depend on its mass" versus "On what does the period of a pendulum depend?"

•	The recommendation of alternative presentations of materials from other textbooks, journals, and popular expositions.



## Courses

Check pretty much any university physics syllabi, and they will generally include 

- a course for social science and humanities students (alternately called Liberal Arts Physics or more cutely, Physics for Poets)

- several introductory courses for physics majors and others who need it for various requirements, such as chemistry majors and pre-medical/dental aspirants

- intermediate and advanced courses for physics majors, including specialties such as Pre-engineering and Biophysics

I taught most of those. Instead of a long description, I will describe my favorite: Liberal Arts Physics, then mention a course for physics students. 

Liberal Arts Physics. 

It's one thing to teach majors' courses, where the students think like us; it's quite another to teach students who think differently. I employed various techniques. One I call the modified Socratic method. I briefly lectured on the subject at hand. Then I asked a question about the material I just chalked and talked.  I didn’t ask for hands. To do so favors the quick and the glib. Instead, I chose a student (preferably one who did not usually shoot their hand up) and asked her or him the question. Then I waited.  Either the student would answer in a reasonable time, or coudn't. If the latter, I followed up with a question whose answer led up to it. If the student still could't answer, I went back further. In my experience, almost all students will reach a point, perhaps several questions back, when they can answer. Then I brought them forward. 

There are two ostensible difficulties with this method. First is the time consumed. Second is the possibility of provoking the student’s anxiety. For the first, the time used acts as a review of the subject for the other students, some of whom are unsure of the various answers. For the second, it is the teacher’s obligation to make clear that this is the case, and to assure the student—and all the others—that the procedure will be used randomly on all of them. Finally, the teacher should praise the student as they answer each of the questions in the process. 

I used in-class group exercises in lieu of labs, which are not usually part of the liberal arts physics course. For example, when we were studying circular motion, I divided the class into groups; one set of groups to discuss how a clothes washer works; the other set, a clothes dryer. I asked them to estimate the various rotational speeds for typical washers and dryers--they chose the radii of the drums. 

Freshman Physics Projects.

For freshman physics students we had group projects. These were semester-long, several hours a week. Students selected projects and chose an instructor as adviser. Here are some examples:

High friction surfaces

Dynamics of motion in vertical circles

Seismological models in the laboratory 

Friction on ice

Analysis of pianos

Investigation of wind turbines and solar cells  

At the conclusion of the course, each group made a presentation to faculty and any students who wish to attend. These were twelve minutes long: ten for presentation, two for questions and comments. (The amounts were fexible.) Each of the group members presented part of the report. Grading by the advisors was for each individual student and for the group as a whole. Our freshman project course was just one of many examples of group project work. It and similar group methods have been shown to be pedagogically effective. One of the greatest virtues of group project work is that also it levels the playing field, especially for females and less confident students.

Much more can be said about pedagogy, but this shall suffice. You can find more in Helge Kastrup's and my book, *Fear of Physics*  https://iopscience.iop.org/book/mono/978-0-7503-4866-9  
GRAPHIC


# RESEARCH

Here I describe reseacrch projects in which I was involved.


## Physics of the eye: the double flash effect

In 1980, Professor of Psychology Richard Bowen (my Loyola colleague) discovered that if you shine a bright light over a brief time into the eye and follow it with another, you will see the second one flickering, despite the fact that the light iself doesn't. From this we concluded that the flickering is generated in the eye. You might have seen oscillating pulses on a cardiac machine in a hospital. They are the flicker response to a pulse from the heart. You might also have see a square pulse analogous in shape to our inital bright light--hopefully not: that's called flatlining. 

Rich asked me if physics could help in understanding the phenomenon. Since the bright square-shaped "inducing" pulse" causes flicker of the "response pulse", suppose we make the inducer flicker and see what the response does. I proposed that we try a non-square inducing pulse and see what happens to the to the flicker. Are there inducer frequencies that produce brighter and/or more flickers? We found the answer to be yes. This was an example of an effect called resonance, which occures in many phenomena. It's what you get when you tune in a radio station. At certain frequencies of the inducer, we saw the  flicker intensity light become higher and generally produce more flickers. This occurred at more than one inducer frequency. This was more complicted that the single-renonance effect. Let's turn to a musical instrument for an analogy. For any but the flute, which produces a single fundamental, there appear ultraharmonics: overtones. Its name gives the information: in addition to the fundamental, higher frequencies appear: those tell you what the instrument is. But there are also lower frequencies appearing: so-called subharmonics or undertones (really--that's the word). Here is an example. https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=i5CSUHpK4QM&t=147). And over-and undertones of flickers were what we saw. Altogether, we saw three resonances: the "fundamental", one overtone, and one undertone. The fundamental resonance appeared at a somewhat different frequency than that predicted by the simplest physical model; one overtone (ultraharmonic) appeared at three times that frequency and one undertone (subharmonic) at 1/3  of it. Another Loyola colleague, mathematician Rich Lucas and I examined these effects and found that they were described by a formula called the Duffing Equation. (https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Duffing_equation if you're interested.)

We don't know the biology of the eye : that's not our expertise. But the mathematics and physics we do. Perhaps someday it will all be explained by the biology.

## Physics of the atmosphere

Fog

By Carl Sandburg

The fog comes

on little cat feet.


It sits looking

over harbor and city

on silent haunches

and then moves on.

Well no, it doesn't move on.  It actually sits there for some time perfectly still.   How do we know? From lidar. Taking its name from radar: radio detection and ranging, lidar is light detection and ranging. A radio wavelength of an FM station at 100 million Hertz (your radio reads "100") moving at the speed of light: 300 million meters per second, is 300/100: Three meters. Lidar is much younger than radar: it requires the use of a laser. Lidar wavelengths are in the visible and infrared:  The wavelength of green light is of order five 10 millionths of a meter. It can therefore probe much smaller objects. Radar and lidar work the same way: the simplest design consists of a transmitter and a detector at the same place. A pulse is sent out; it collides with and scatters back from an object to the detector. The total round trip time gives the distance to the object. For radar it could be an airplane. For lidar it can be something much smaller, such as a fog droplet. 

I was part of a group that studied fog by lidar using a pulsed ruby laser as the transmitter, and the telescope at Northwestern University's Lindheimner Astrophysical Research Center (LARC) as the detector. We found that the backscattered signal from the fog was stable over a period of hours, which we had not expected. I also undertook to analyze the "distribution function" of fog droplets;, i.e., how many of each size there might be. What I found (after a lot of math!) I chose reasonable guesses fot the mallest and the largest droplets FYI,their radii are on the order of micrometers: millionths of a meter. Droplets of that size scatter light, making it hard to drive in fog. Not so for rain, whose droplets re much larger, and less susceptible to light scattering.

GRAPHIC OF LARC.

Lidar, fog.. Backscatter; stability; size distrib.

## Physics of the atom

Bohr atom; scf; muonic atoms, transition probabilities

## SUSY QM

Bohr-like orbits-> energy levels. Schr ODE hard; quantum leaps.  
stringed instruments tuned like SUSY.





